- In previous lessons
we have learned about Spring Boot Actuator
and how to use it to expose all kinds of information
about the runtime state of your spring based application.
We have learned how to configure
custom application health reporting, for instance.
Let's take it all one step further
and learn how spring enables your spring application
to interface with the state-of-the-art
runtime monitoring platforms.
The key to how this works is the micrometer library.
Micrometer provides an application metrics facade
that supports numerous runtime monitoring systems,
such as Prometheus and DataDog,
and probably 20 others or more.
Micrometer serves the purpose
of providing a standardized reporting format.
And when spring leverages
the micrometer library to publish its metrics,
it is then publishing them in formats that these other
runtime monitoring systems can consume
and make actionable to the end user.
We are going to use in our demonstration
a platform called Prometheus.
Prometheus is an application runtime monitoring tool
and like many others in its class,
it specializes in fine-grained
and customizable event alerting.
It specializes in trending over time
and in multi-application management.
So you can have a dashboard with many applications
and group them in alerting groups
and capture trending over time in groups of applications.
So that's the specialty Prometheus
and run-time monitoring tools like it.
Before we go into our lesson,
let's first talk about three important categories of metric.
One of them is a counter.
Just as you might think, a counter is a single metric.
It's a count of something.
It's a static report of a number at a given point in time.
An example of something you would use
a counter for is uptime.
Like, to say how many seconds the application has been up.
A second type of metric is a gauge.
A gauge is a current value.
It's a snapshot value,
but it's typically on a range of values with an upper bound.
So gauge metrics allow you
to create graphs to show trends over time.
An example of a gauge is CPU process use.
And then finally a timer metric is, as you might think,
how long something takes.
Typically though,
relative to other actions in the same series.
So an example of a timer type of metric would be
latency on an HTTP request, for example.
Now that we've got some of these basic terminology in mind,
let's have a look at an integration
of our spring application into
this runtime monitoring platform called Prometheus.
First of all, let's have a look at start state.
Okay, so right now we've got our demo application running
and I started it running before this lesson started.
And what I'd like to show you
is one of these endpoints in this actuator output
that we've been looking at for a bit now.
The end point we're going to look at
is the metrics end point.
This end point shows all of the categories of metric
that spring boot is reporting through the micrometer library
in order to be consumed by a runtime platform.
The reason I'm showing you this is,
is what we're going to do next is
we are going to configure a custom metric
to publish along with the other of these default metrics.
So let's stop our app
and let's walk through how this is done.
Let us start, as we often do with the pom file.
The pom dot XML file for this Maven based application
is telling us the dependence that we need to pull in.
And first of all, in order to make this work,
we need to pull in a dependency on this library
that I mentioned a minute ago,
the IO dot micrometer library,
and specifically we're pulling in
the Prometheus's registry underneath this library,
which has specific registry that's compatible
with the Prometheus platform.
So we're pulling in this micrometer metrics facade library,
and just as a reminder,
we're also pulling in the spring boot
actuator dependency right here.
That's why we can see these actuator metrics at all.
Okay. So that's in our pom dot XML.
We build this and all the things that we need come in.
Another thing I want to point out to you is a reminder
that we are exposing all of our endpoints over the web,
which is an important thing for Prometheus to work.
In particular, actually,
it just needs to have the Prometheus metrics exposed,
but we're exposing them all for demo purposes
and so that's why we're going to be able to see
what we need to see in this browser
and Prometheus we'll be able to consume it.
Finally, having done those things,
the path to setting up a custom metric
is astonishingly simple.
We are depending here,
like I mentioned before,
on the IO micrometer library,
and we're going to create a public class,
let's call it the weekend gauge.
Now let's register this class that we scaffolded here
with the spring context, using the component annotation.
Now spring will inject our dependency on the
meter registry from the IO micrometer library.
And all we need to do here is
set some state on this registry
and we're going to set up a gauge.
Remember I talked about the three types?
The counter, the gauge, the timer.
Registry gives us a quick shortcut to set up a gauge.
We're going to use the three parameter
signature of this method.
And first we will give it a name for our gauge,
let's call it
weekend time to...
wait.
And we're going to use the tags class
from our micrometer library.
We're actually going to send some tags.
So we'll send an empty tag set.
And then finally, what goes here,
the number that we want to report
for this particular metric,
which is a countdown to the weekend here
in a private class inside this gauge class.
It's just a silly,
single number that tells us how long it is to the weekend.
Believe it or not, this is all we need to do.
Let's restart our app.
What do you say?
Give it a few seconds here to start up.
We are loaded.
Now, let's refresh our actuator page.
Let's go into our metrics.
And at the bottom you will see our new metric.
Let's take this a step further
and let's look at the Prometheus metrics.
Now this page of a complicated looking text
is the input that the Prometheus platform pulls in.
It's kind of a formatted view of all of these different
metrics that Prometheus will be able to understand,
again, thanks to the micrometer library.
We will see our weekend metric.
There it is.
Our weekend time to wait gauge is here and it wasn't before.
Now, just to prove this whole thing out,
let's go over to Prometheus,
which I happen to have running here.
Quick overview here.
We've got two targets registered here in Prometheus.
I'll give you a notice at the end of here,
how this is done,
but one of them is our demo API,
which is up thanks to our health metric
that we have surfaced.
Now let's go in here to the graph
and look for our new leaf configured gauge,
weekend time to wait,
and we will see that we have numbers here.
If we waited long enough over the period of several days,
this gauge would climb up on Monday
and start walking back down Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday.
Just to give you a little bit more sense of how this works,
let's open up another panel here in Prometheus,
and let's have a look at say the system CPU usage,
and you can actually see a more meaningful graph
showing all kinds of metrics here collected over time.
So that's how Prometheus works.
Finally, let me do show you.
We can't go all into Prometheus and configuring it,
but there is a Prometheus YML file,
in which we have configured our demo API,
which we saw there on the targets page.
We're giving it the path to the metrics
as this actuator Prometheus path,
which is this right here,
and told it the host,
which is local host 9092.
So that's how Prometheus is coming in
and pulling in these metrics.
There, now we have successfully configured
a custom Prometheus metric using spring boot actuator,
and the micrometer library.